## Learn Objective-C, Objects (Part 1): Splitting Classes Into Multiple Files

This is the first in a multi-part series that will talk about the fundamentals of objects. If you’re still keeping track, I suppose these would all fall under Lesson 6: Objects.

In [Lesson 3](46.md), we began a simple overview to object-oriented programming. Now, we’ve covered the major portions of the basic language- what is “plain C.” There are other topics, such as structs, arrays, and a slew of other rather obscure topics. Some of these are enclosed or remade in the code the Apple provides for free; others will be discussed as necessary. For now, we will start venturing into the exciting world of objects- and they really are exciting.

As part of our calculator, we will allow the calculator to operate on regular values, as well as fractions. For the sake of demonstration, we will begin by creating Fraction objects.

### Creating the Test Code 

[Create a new Xcode project](57.md). In the New Project window, choose "Command Line Tool" under macOS. Click Next, and save it as "FractionDemo" anywhere you choose. In the File List, load FractionDemo.m, and enter the following code:

```objc
#import "Fraction.h"

int main (int argc, const char *argv[]) {
    NSAutoreleasePool *pool = [[NSAutoreleasePool alloc] init];

    Fraction *myFraction = [[Fraction alloc] init];

    // Set myFraction to value of 2/5
    [myFraction setNumerator: 2];
    [myFraction setDenominator: 5];

    // Display the value of myFraction
    NSLog(@"myFraction has a value of: ");
    [myFraction display];

    [myFraction release];
    [pool drain];
    return 0;
}
```

Here, you can see that in our main code body, we create an object of type `Fraction`, and call it `myFraction`. Ignore the asterisk (`*` for now; it is a sign that you are actually creating a pointer…that’s an advanced topic that will be further explored later). You set `myFraction` to the value returned from the standard `alloc`/`init` method call.

Next, we call the methods `setNumerator:` and `setDenominator:` and pass both integer values; these methods will set the appropriate values of the Fraction object we’ve created. We then send another message call for myFraction to display itself (or so we assume, based on the method name—make sure to write descriptive method names). Then we release our object—don’t worry about the memory management for now.

Now, we will create the actual Fraction object itself.

### Creating the Fraction Class

In Xcode, Go to File > New File (⌘N). Under the macOS tab, select "Header File". Click Next. Enter "Fraction" for the header name. It should appear as "Fraction.h". Click Create. Select the "Fraction.h" file in Xcode, and enter the following code:

```objc
#import <Foundation/Foundation.h>

@interface Fraction : NSObject {
    NSInteger numerator;
    NSInteger denominator;
}
- (void)setNumerator:(NSInteger)value;
- (void)setDenominator:(NSInteger)value;
- (void)display;

@end
```

Here we define two instance variables, called "numerator" and "denominator". They are defined as type `NSInteger`; this is identical to the standard `int` type; there’s really no difference. My personal preference is `NSInteger`.

Next, we define the methods that we call in the `main()` method. There should not be anything new here, if you’ve read through [Lesson 3](46.md).

Create "Fraction.m" by creating another new file. Follow the steps above, except create an "Objective-C File" instead of a "Header File". Enter "Fraction" in the text field, after selecting Next. Do not touch either of the drop down menus. Click Create, and enter the code below:

```objc
#import "Fraction.h"

@implementation Fraction
- (void)setNumerator:(NSInteger)value {
    numerator = value;
}

- (void)setDenominator:(NSInteger)value {
    denominator = value;
}

- (void)display {
    NSString *numeratorString = [[NSString alloc] initWithFormat:@"%d", numerator];
    NSString *denominatorString = [[NSString alloc] initWithFormat:@"%d", denominator];
    NSLog(@"%@/%@", numeratorString, denominatorString);
    [denominatorString release];
    [numeratorString release];
}

@end
```

Chewing through this code, the first two methods should not present anything new. The last method does warrant some discussion, however.

If you refer back to [Lesson 3](46.md), you’ll notice that we defined the display method (we called it `showResults` there) as

```objc
- (void)showResults {
    NSLog(@"This is a fraction with a value of %d/%d", numerator, denominator);
}
```

Our display method shows a different way to do this. First, we highlight `NSString`’s `initWithFormat:` method, which works like `NSLog()` does, except that instead of outputting, it is saved as a string. In the actual `NSLog()`, we use the `%@` format specifier, which takes an `NSString` as an argument. Finally, we have to release the NSStrings that we’ve created… again, don’t worry about the memory management at the moment.

If we Build and Run now, we get the following output:

```
myFraction has a value of:
2/5
```

This is exactly what we’re looking for.

You’ll notice that we haven’t really done anything new since Lesson 3. In fact, that is true, except that we have created a `Fraction` class in separate files. Looking back over the code entries, the bold lines show where the dependencies lie- in a class’s `.m` file, it `#imports` the correspond `.h` (known as the "header") file. In any file that uses the class you’ve created, you also need to import the header. Here, you’ve made it easier to maintain a larger project; as we add more classes, you won’t be working with one gigantic file.

*This post is part of the [Learn Objective-C in 24 Days](38.md) course.*

---

[Previous Lesson](57.md) | [Next Lesson](59.md)
