## Learn Objective-C: Conditional Compilation

Building off of the [last post](69.md), there are a few more preprocessor directives that allow you to control which portions of a program are compiled.

### The `#ifdef`, `#endif`, `#else`, and `#ifndef` Statements

Sometimes (and hopefully not often), a program relies on system- or platform-specific features that must be written differently across different platforms. For example, not all iOS devices can run iOS 4.x, so any program that uses 4.x features must check to see if the system can support that feature. Or an application for OS X can check for the architecture of the system, PowerPC or Intel, or the version of the OS.

The `#ifdef`, `#endif`, and `#else` directives work just like the `if…else` construct; the `#endif` directive is used to end an `#ifdef` block, just like a curly brace (`}`) ends an if block.

Note that a definition such as `#define POWER_PC` is sufficient to pass the `#ifdef` test; no value actually has to be specified for the constant.

So how does it work?

```objc
#ifdef MAC_OS_X
#   define DATADIR ~/Documents
#else
    NSLog(@"Not running in OS X");
#endif
```

This can also be used for debugging:

```objc
#ifdef DEBUG
    NSLog(@"Data array is %@", self.dataArray);
#endif
```

This makes the code (your debugging intentions) clearer. When the program is working properly, you can undefine `DEBUG` and the `NSLog`s will not even be compiled in.

The `#ifndef` statement is the exact opposite of `#ifdef`- the code that follows gets executed only if the value is not defined.

### The `#if` and `#elif` Directives

These directives are similar to `if()…` and `else if()…`. For example, the following appears in `NSString.h`:

```objc
#if MAC_OS_X_VERSION_MIN_REQUIRED < MAC_OS_X_VERSION_10_5
#define NSMaximumStringLength     (INT_MAX - 1)
#endif
```

The example is rather self explanatory.

The operator defined (something) can also be used in `#if` statements:

```objc
#if defined(DEBUG)
// Is equivalent to
#ifdef DEBUG
```

A common use of this is `#if` defined (`DEBUG`) && `DEBUG`, which will be true if `DEBUG` has been defined to a non-zero value.

### The `#undef` Operator

The `#undef` operator undefines a name:

```objc
#undef DEBUG
```

Subsequent `#ifdef DEBUG` and `#if defined(DEBUG)` statements evaluate to false.

### Determining iPads

Conditional compilation can be useful in determining if you’re running on an iPad or not. Apple provides a `UI_USER_INTERFACE_IDIOM()` macro that can perform the check for you:

```objc
if (UI_USER_INTERFACE_IDIOM() == UIUserInterfaceIdiomPad)
    //iPad code
else
    //iPhone code
```

If you have extensive code changes or want to load a different set of resources for example, the iPad code won’t ever get compiled for the iPhone and vice versa, which could simplify the resulting binary (remember, only apps under 100MBs can be downloaded off a cellular connection. You want to make your app as small as reasonably possible).

---

[Previous Lesson](69.md) | [Next Lesson](71.md)
