## Learn Objective-C: Advanced KVC

[Last lesson](79.md) covered the basics of KVC, and it is those features that would be used 90% of the time. But KVC has some more to offer. Let’s take a look.

### Batch Processing

Another one of KVC’s methods is `dictionaryWithValuesForKeys:`. The single argument is an array of strings. From that, the invokes valueForKey: with each key, and returns a dictionary with the keys and values. For example, to get some attributes of a piece of merchandise from our hypothetical store, we could use the following code:

```objc
Merchandise *product = [[store valueForKeyPath:@"merchandise"] lastObject];   // Last object in array
NSArray *keys = [NSArray arrayWithObjects: @"brand", @"price", @"department", @"shelf", @"netWeight", nil];
NSDictionary *productInfo = [product dictionaryWithValuesForKeys:keys];
```

You could then use this dictionary in an inventory tracking program, for example.

This method also has a counterpart, `setValuesForKeysWithDictionary:`. Called on an instance of any object, this method goes through each key in the dictionary, and replaces that key’s value in the object with the new value.

### nil Values

Here is one minor issue that you might run into with KVC. You can’t put `nil` into a dictionary (or array for that matter), because `nil` tells the collection that it’s the end of data. Therefore, you have to use `[NSNull null]` instead, and that’s the value you’ll get back if you call `valueForKey:` on an object type. But what happens if you try to set nil for a scalar type, such as an integer? By default, you get an error at runtime. Therefore, you have to override `setNilValueForKey:` and define your own implementation. In our store, the method might look like this:

```objc
- (void)setNilValueForKey:(NSString *)key {
    if ([key isEqualToString:@"price"])
        [self setValue:[NSNumber numberWithInt:0] forKey:@"price"];
    else
        [super setNilValueForKey:key];
}
```

### Error Handling

What happens if you try to access or set a value for a key that doesn’t exist? In general, you get the compiler or runtime warning that looks like “this class is not key value coding-compliant for the key someKeyThatDoesNotExist.” Fortunately, when KVC encounters this it will ask the class what to do. As such, there are two methods that you can override: `valueForUndefinedKey:` and `setValue:forUndefinedKey:`.

A simple way to handle this issue is to simply tell the user that the key is invalid. So to protect our store from crashes, we’re going to just do that:

```objc
- (void)setValue:(id)value forUndefinedKey:(NSString *)key {
    NSLog(@"Cannot set anything for this key. The key %@ is not valid.", key);
}

- (void)valueForUndefinedKey:(NSString *)key {
    NSLog(@"Cannot get value for this key. The key %@ is not valid.", key);
}
```

Obviously, KVC is a very powerful feature, and allows you to build very robust, abstract applications. In fact, it is the core data access mechanism in Core Data, Apple’s framework for accessing data from a database. But that’s a complex topic for another day.

*This post is part of the [Learn Objective-C in 24 Days](38.md) course.*

---

[Previous Lesson](79.md) | [Next Lesson](81.md)
